the coal mines of centralia pennsylvania
go back to the 1850s
the town was based on coal in all senses
it stood on a coal mine and its
residents used it
not only to fuel their homes but also to
fuel the town's economy
by the end of the 19th century it
already had more than 2
700 people most of whom were minors and
their families
people dwelling there were happy and
nothing seemed to disturb their peace
they had a good job in the stable coal
industry that was powerful enough to
overcome
even serious economic disasters
the flourishing industrial town had only
one
but quite acute problem there was way
too much garbage
and its quantity would grow at breakneck
speed spreading bad
smell and attracting rats by the middle
of the 20th century
there were eight illegal dumps it was in
that local authorities made one large
landfill
searching to solve the town's stinky
problem yet creating a bigger landfill
took a heavy toll
rats and bad odors started haunting
centralia even more
the amount of waste was tremendous and
no one wanted their cozy town
to look like this especially on the
memorial day holiday
the council didn't give up and in may of
they decided to get rid of all the trash
by simply burning it to ashes
they were sure this method could make
their hometown clean again
one thing they couldn't foresee the fire
burned on the surface yes
but beneath it also the fire spread
and the people didn't realize they were
actually walking on the ground that had
burning coal underneath them having
sparked in may of 1962
the fire never stopped burning the
town's been ablaze
for over 50 years now back then
people couldn't believe such a thing
could happen to their beloved little
town
it was slowly but inevitably burning out
and were still
it was threatening to take all of them
with it into the fiery abyss
the fire spread quickly through an
opening in the pit
cracks and fissures let the oxygen in so
the blaze soon got bigger
setting even more coal on fire to make
matters worse
the flames were almost invisible on the
surface to stop them
people needed to know which mine exactly
was burning
but it was next to impossible mines are
a complex system of underground tunnels
with no special equipment available the
locals started realizing
it was time they'd given up fires were
blazing under the feet of unknowing
residents
becoming hotter with every passing day
fumes were rising from under the ground
making people cough and their eyes go
wet from acidic tears
carbon monoxide levels weren't safe the
town got full of smoke
the fire was getting so relentless that
the fumes could even pour out of
sinkholes
many basements were filled with smoke
too it got hotter than ever before in
centralia
with the raging fire the temperature
underneath the ground
reach a critical 900 degrees fahrenheit
while the absolute record
was 1 350 degrees
people's lives were at stake apparently
only temporary measures to stop the fire
could be taken
the mines would burn for a while and
then firefighters would drown them with
water
which didn't quite accomplish the
purpose water was no remedy for
centralia burning from the
inside the local council couldn't manage
to put the fire out
so there was nothing left to do but to
make people leave the once prosperous
town that got extremely
unhealthy and unsafe the mines would
have to be shut down
ending the town's economy respiratory
problems hypertension
and even such issues as depression and
anxiety haunted the residents
and made living in this town almost
impossible
most people tried to escape the town at
all costs
toxic gases emitted by the mines were no
less dangerous than the fire itself
some people were also afraid that their
residences could drastically fall in
prize
because of the neighboring mines they
were terrified
thinking they could lose everything
they'd earned working hard in hot and
dusty coal mines
although the workers were used to bad
ventilation at that point
the town was not that different from a
mine they worked in
but even so not everyone volunteered to
leave their hometown
some people wanted to keep their
household whatever the cost
in turn congress decided not to get rid
of the fire in centralia
but to get rid of the residents by 1983
over seven million dollars was spent not
only to control the fire
but also to provide emergency relocation
for some of the residents
in the following 30 years about 42
million dollars were spent on the
relocation program
around 52 000 was spent on each
household
calculated on square footage and values
of real estate in neighboring zones
basically the state bought almost all
the houses that were there
but now nobody can purchase any property
in this town
the town became deserted and in the end
after september eighteenth 18
2003 they even eliminated its zip code
there was almost nothing left but seven
residents
the homeowners fought for their rights
in federal court and were eventually
allowed to stay
by 2017 there were only five people left
none of them aged under 18. there are
few public services for them
and only a group of volunteer
firefighters the only fire engine they
have is more than 30 years old
the total burning surface is estimated
to be as large as 400
acres as if almost the entire
principality of monaco was on fire
still the area is pretty patchy so it's
not that everything burns at the same
time
another issue is that it spreads not
only in area but in depth too
mines are about 300 feet deep and
stretch over eight miles
and the total area is about 3 700 acres
if it continues burning as it does today
the coal deposits are likely to last for
at least
250 years a bustling town that gave
people resources
turned into a place ill-suited for
living centralia is a bit of a ghost
town now
its streets are deserted most people
abandoned this place long ago
and there are almost no buildings left
and yet
centralia is not the only coal-fueled
fire that lasts this long
coal fires are pretty common across the
globe
in jara india the underground flames
were first spotted back in 1916.
surprisingly more than 80 000 people
still live there
despite the fumes the source of the fire
is unknown
it could have been caused by lightning
or some other natural disaster
a city on fire for over a century is not
a record either
australian burning mountains have been
smoldering for about 6 000 years now
and some people even claim that the
fire's been burning around 15 000 years
already
the mountains aren't burning but rather
smoking since the sulfur smoke gets to
the surface through cracks
these cracks keep the area constantly on
fire
the air gets in through the holes and
the blaze just won't stop
not only fumes but the odor won't let
you breathe air
the air smells sulfurous and it's
scorching hot with over 600 degrees on
the surface
and about 3000 degrees underneath the
ground where the coal is burning